---
layout: post
title: Rustful 0.1.0
---

The time has finally come, when I feel confident enough to give [Rustful
][rustful-repo] (a small web/HTTP framework for Rust) a proper version number
and publish it on [crates.io][rustful-crates]. I would therefore like to take
the opportunity to tell you about its past, present and future, and show you
what it's all about. You can always take a look at the above links for more
hands-on info and a few working examples, if you think this is too much
rambling.

## In the Beginning There Was Only Git Submodules

I started working on Rustful around the beginning of 2014, as a tool for a
university course project. We had quite free hands with the project so I
wanted to spice it up a little and build it using Rust. The problem was just
that I could not find any up-to-date server libraries back then, except for
the now abandoned [rust-http][rust-http] by Chris Morgan. My project required
some kind of REST-like[^rest] API with routing and stuff, so I decided to
build my own framework on top of rust-http.

_Note that I do **not** claim to be or care about being the first or the original
or anything_. There were other frameworks out there, but those I could find
were not up-to-date. I mean, we didn't even have Cargo to help us and I
managed my dependencies using Git submodules, so times were indeed rough.

Anyway, I chose to keep developing Rustful after my course project was
completed and did my best to keep pushing features and fixes while the
language evolved and even more frameworks popped up. Some of the other
frameworks aimed at high abstraction levels, but I decided to stay at a
relatively low level because I thought that there would be a niche for that as
well.

I kept on tinkering like that until I had to take a long break and focus on my
studies. I did eventually regain my motivation and decided that I should fix
this thing up, remove unnecessary or half baked features and make it available
on cargo.io. This is where we are now.

## Computer, Make Me a Website!

The focus of this first development phase was not to make Rustful "feature
rich", but rather to build a solid base. The intention is to create a
relatively thin layer on top of [Hyper][hyper] (the current HTTP backend),
that should be light, modular and simple to build something with (or on). It
should not stand in your way or force your hand if it's not absolutely
necessary to make things work.

Rustful provides a set of common presets which makes it as easy as throwing a
closure into a function to fire up a new server:

```rust
extern crate rustful;
use rustful::{Server, Context, Response};

#[allow(unused_must_use)]
fn main() {
    Server::new(|_: Context, response: Response| {
        response.into_writer().send("Hello!");
    }).run();
}
```

But that doesn't give you much, so I'll let this serve as the obligatory
"Hello world" and instead move on to what it can do. The `Server` struct you
can see in the above example lets you configure your server before starting
it. It is completely public, allowing you to simply assign values to the
parameters you want to change:

```rust
Server {
    host: 8080.into(),
    handlers: router,
    log: Box::new(log),
    server: "My Unmitigatedly Majestic Server".into(),
    ..Server::default()
}
```

Not too complicated, right? I'll still go through them, just in case:

  1. `host: 8080.into()`: The `host` field contains the address where the
  server will listen for incoming requests. It's actually both an IP and a
  port, but this example shows only how to set the port. Setting the IP is not
  much harder, so don't worry. This field can also be excluded if the server
  should listen to `0.0.0.0:80`.

  2. `handlers: router`: The `handlers` field contains the request handlers.
  These will receive the requests after the server has added some more
  contextual data and tools. This is also what the `Server::new(...)` method
  in the previous example expects as parameter.

  3. `log: Box::new(log)`: Each part of the server has access to a shared
  logger and this allows you to decide where all the printing goes. This
  logger is included in the `Context` type, among others.

  4. `server: "My Unmitigatedly Majestic Server".into()`: I guess you want to
  give your server a name, right? This is what it will send out in the
  `Server` header with each response.

  5. `..Server::default()`: And set the rest of the fields to their default
  values. Done!

You may wonder why there is a `Server::new(handlers)` function in addition to
the `Server::default()` function. The reason for this is, besides calling
`new` and being done with it, that the type of `handlers` does not always
implement the `Default` trait. `new` can then be used instead of `default`:

```rust
Server {
    host: 8080.into(),
    log: Box::new(log),
    server: "My Unmitigatedly Majestic Server".into(),
    ..Server::new(router)
}
```

The `handlers` field is not explicitly set here and `router` is instead used
as input to `new`.

## Take Me to Your Handler

One of the initial goals of Rustful was to provide an easy way to set up
routing, so that is sort of built into the core, but not with a router built
into the server. Not exactly, anyway. The `handlers` field in `Server` expects
something that implements the `Router` trait, which has a method that takes a
path and an HTTP method and returns a handler. This trait is, as a bonus, also
implemented for anything that can be a handler, making it a router with itself
as the only handler.

Using traits for routers and handlers makes everything modular and
replaceable. You could decide that the `TreeRouter`, provided by Rustful, is
not what you want and replace it with something else. That's totally OK and
will work perfectly as long as it implements the `Router` trait.

This `Router` trait does also set a standard for how routes are defined,
making it convenient to insert handlers without caring too much about what
they go into:

```rust
fn insert_some_routes<R: Router<MyHandlerType>>(router: &mut R) {
    //...
    router.insert(Get, "users", list_users);
    router.insert(Get, "users/:user", show_user);
    router.insert(Delete, "users/:user", delete_user);
    router.insert(Get, "users/:user/friends", list_friends);
    router.insert(Post, "users/:user/friends", add_friend);
    router.insert(Delete, "users/:user/friends/:friend", delete_friend);
    router.insert(Get, "about", about_us);
    //...
}
```

The `:something` syntax is not standardized, but it's used in `TreeRouter` to
define variable segments. They will take anything the client replaces them
with as input and pass it to the handler, so if the client asks for
`/users/12`, the handler at `/users/:user` would be called with the variable
`user` set to `12`. It's not uncommon in other routing libraries, so you have
probably seen this before.

That's how you populate a router, [but wait! There's more!][but-wait] Rustful
comes with a macro that lets you write your routes as a tree structure:

```rust
fn insert_some_routes<R: Router<MyHandlerType>>(router: &mut R) {
    //...
    insert_routes! {
        router => {
            "users" => {
                "/" => Get: list_users,
                ":user" => {
                    "/" => Get: show_user,
                    "/" => Delete: delete_user,
                    "friends" => {
                        "/" => Get: list_friends,
                        "/" => Post: add_friend,
                        ":friend" => Delete: delete_friend
                    }
                }
            },
            "about" => Get: about_us
        }
    }
    //...
}
```

Which one is the best? You decide. The macro may feel more verbose, but the
point of it is to prevent typos and make it easier to read. You will only have
to write each path segment once and it may also give you a better overview.
Both alternatives lets you do the same thing, so the only difference is that
the path in the macro is broken into pieces.

## Handle with Ease

A handler in Rustful is a quite modest being. The idea, right from the start,
is that it should be possible to just throw a function into a router and it
should just work. This is still the case[^handler-fn], as can be seen in the first
example above, where a closure is used as a handler.

Here is a simple handler function, taken from the `hello_world.rs` example:

```rust
fn say_hello(context: Context, response: Response) {
    //Get the value of the path variable `:person`.
    let person = match context.variables.get("person") {
        Some(name) => &name[..],
        None => "stranger"
    };

    //Use the value of the path variable to say hello.
    if let Err(e) = response.into_writer().send(format!("Hello, {}!", person))  {
        context.log.note(&format!("could not send hello: {}", e.description()));
    }
}
```

The comments should explain it quite well, and what it responds with is
`Hello, stranger!` if you visit `/` and `Hello, Name!` if you visit `/Name`.

The `Context` contains the request data and some more. It comes with all the
contextual tools and data that may be useful for the handler, except for the
prepared response. You can, as an example, see how `context` is used to log
failed `send(...)` calls[^log-send].

The fact that the `Context` is owned by the handler makes it possible to
deconstruct it and move values out of it. The `Response`, on the other hand,
is completely closed, and the reason for this is the strict procedure of writing
data to the client, so it's not supposed to be picked apart.

The `Response` is used in two stages; `Response` where status code and headers
can be set, and `ResponseWriter` where the body data is written. This makes it
impossible to send body data to the client before the headers have been sent.
Transforming the `Response` into a `ResponseWriter` causes the headers to
become unaccessible, as they have already been sent to the client.

## #Filter

Everything mentioned so far has been pretty much standard server stuff, so
let's finish this off with something slightly less standard before we move on
to the future.

Rustful comes with something called filters that allows you to change
the incoming and outgoing data before and after it passes through the
handlers. The idea is that there are some situations where something is
supposed to be done no matter what the handler does and these operations can
be implemented as filters. This will also give you control over a larger part
of the data flow.

One simple example is surrounding JSON data with a function call, like in the
JSONP standard. You can have a handler that checks for a query variable with a
function name and notifies a `ResponseFilter`. The filter will then inject the
function call into the body when it's written. Such a filter may look like this:

```rust
struct JsonpFn(String);

struct Jsonp;

impl ResponseFilter for Jsonp {
    fn begin(&self, ctx: FilterContext, status: StatusCode, headers: Headers)
    -> (StatusCode, Headers, ResponseAction) {
        //Check if a JSONP function is defined and write the beginning of the call.
        let output = if let Some(&JsonpFn(ref function)) = ctx.storage.get() {
            Some(format!("{}(", function))
        } else {
            None
        };

        (status, headers, ResponseAction::next(output))
    }

    fn write<'a>(&'a self, _ctx: FilterContext, bytes: Option<Data<'a>>) -> ResponseAction {
        ResponseAction::next(bytes)
    }

    fn end(&self, ctx: FilterContext) -> ResponseAction {
        //Check if a JSONP function is defined and write the end of the call.
        let output = ctx.storage.get::<JsonpFn>().map(|_| ");");
        ResponseAction::next(output)
    }
}
```

...and the handler could look something like this:

```rust
{% raw %}
fn say_hello(mut context: Context, mut response: Response) {
    //Take the name of the JSONP function from the query variables.
    if let Some(jsonp_name) = context.query.remove("jsonp") {
        response.filter_storage().insert(JsonpFn(jsonp_name));
    }

    let person = match context.variables.get("person") {
        Some(name) => &name[..],
        None => "stranger"
    };

    //Send some simple JSON data.
    let data = format!("{{\"message\": \"Hello, {}!\"}}", person);
    if let Err(e) = response.into_writer().send(data)  {
        context.log.note(&format!("could not send hello: {}", e.description()));
    }
}
{% endraw %}
```

Note the use of `context.query.remove("jsonp")`. No one else should be
interested in that query variable so this saves us a clone.

Filters are stored in two `Vec`s in the server and the one containing the
response filters is then borrowed by the response structures. They can pass
data to each other and the handler using an [`AnyMap`][any-map], and it's all
local to each request.

Filters are still a bit experimental and I haven't had time to properly test
them in any more "real" situations than the examples. I will therefore not
take us any deeper into this subject, but you can always take a look at the
`filters.rs` example where the above filter and a couple of context filters
are demonstrated.

## So, What Happens Next?

This is only the beginning, and there are still a lot of things to do (especially
when it comes to documentation) and still some internal cruft to take care of
before I would even dare giving Rustful the 1.0.0 version. The main thing to
do is to test it, fix bugs and polish it, based on your and other users'
feedback. How do you use it? What is good? What is missing? What should
change? Every piece of constructive feedback is absolutely necessary to make
this good!

There are also a number of changes and additions on [the list][rustful-issues],
like a central storage and taking the library as close to RESTfulness as it
can reasonably get without sacrificing too much usability. I don't think it
will be too hard, but those are also some famous last words. I would also like
to add some more utilities and make the server even more modular (if
possible).

## Over and Out!

I hope that this post has sparked some interest and that you will give Rustful
a try. [Here is the link to crates.io][rustful-crates] again, in case you
missed it at the top, and you can also find links to the repository and the
documentation there. Thank you for your time and interest, and have fun
building servers!

[^rest]: Buzzword, I know, but that was my reasoning back then.
[^handler-fn]: There is, unfortunately, a certain compiler bug that prevents us from doing this in all cases, but it can easily be worked around by wrapping the function in a struct.
[^log-send]: That line is only there for this example. It's not necessarily a good idea to log every failed use of `send(...)`.

[rustful-repo]: https://github.com/Ogeon/rustful
[rustful-crates]: https://crates.io/crates/rustful
[rustful-issues]: https://github.com/Ogeon/rustful/issues
[rust-http]: https://github.com/chris-morgan/rust-http
[any-map]: https://crates.io/crates/anymap
[hyper]: https://crates.io/crates/hyper
[but-wait]: http://i.imgur.com/JfbM6d3.png
