---
layout: post
title: Palette 0.7.4
---

New year, more [Palette][palette_crates]!

For those who aren't familiar with it, Palette is a Rust library for working with colors, including color conversion and color management. Its features range from common tasks, like color blending or converting HSL to RGB, to more advanced topics. It leverages Rust's type system, by encoding color space information as type parameters, to be able to prevent mistakes and to keep it open to extension and customization.

## `alloc` Feature

A new `alloc` Cargo feature has been added for the parts that make user of allocating types (i.e. `Box<T>` and `Vec<T>`). This used to be part of the `std` feature, but separating it makes it possible to use these types without requiring the whole `std` library. Those who already have `std` enabled will get both, so there's no need to do anything in that case. The parts that still require `std` are `Error` trait implementations. `std` will also provide floating point operations, but `libm` can be used instead.

## More Color Difference Traits

This version adds the `DeltaE` trait (not to be confused with `Ciede2000`), which represents the "default" _ΔE_ color distance formula for a color space. This is the formula that is specified in the specification or research paper that introduced the color space, and is usually an alias for `EuclideanDistance`. There may be better options, but this is the "original" for those that have one.

In addition to `DeltaE`, two other traits are added. These are `ImprovedDeltaE` and `ImprovedCiede2000`, representing modified versions of `DeltaE` and `Ciede2000`, according to _Power functions improving the performance of color-difference formulas_ by Huang et al. These add a power function, fine tuned for each formula, to make their results better on average. It's a more costly option, but may be worth it for the increased accuracy.

## `Rgba::from_str`

It was previously possible to parse a hexadecimal string as `Rgb<_, u8>`. Now it's also possible to parse it with an alpha channel, thanks to rafaelbeckel.

```rust
let rgba_from_hex: Srgba<u8> = "#f034e652".parse().unwrap(); // #RRGGBBAA
```

This also supports the shorter `#RGBA` format and the `#` is optional on both cases.

## Documentation Improvements

The documentation had been updated with some more introductory info, quick links at the top of the main page, and a number of small usage examples for `Rgb`. The hope is that this will be helpful for those who are new to the library and make it easier to get started with the most common parts. More color types will get similar examples later, but this is a start.

A typo in the documentation for the `Stimulus` trait was also kindly fixed by MultisampledNight.

## `Okhsl` Fix

There were a couple of cases where conversion from `Oklab` to `Okhsl` could return `NaN` values. Particularly if the `lightness` is `1.0` or `0.0` and `a` or `b` is something other than `0.0`. This has been fixed and only actual numbers should be returned now.

`NaN` values are usually considered bugs, so any reports of them are appreciated.

## Refactor and `Hwb` Equality

The internals of the crate have been refactored to reduce some repetition, with the help of macros. Palette has been using macros for this for quite a while, since a lot of the traits have very similar implementations across the color types, but it was time for another round of macrofication. It's nice to be able to delete around 2000 lines.

As part of this, the equality check for `Hwb` has been changed to always take the hue into account. This brings it in line with all the other hue based color spaces, which should have been done long ago. `Hwb` is an odd color space, compared to the rest, so it didn't fit into most of the earlier macros. Nowadays, it's joined by `Okhwb`, and the incentive to add macros for both of them was higher. This mistake was found while unifying their implementations.

This shouldn't affect anyone, unless you happen to rely on `Hwb` for color comparison. In that case, it's strongly recommended to use a color space without hue, to consider the traits from the `color_difference` module, or to implement your own equality check.

## Wrapping Up

I want to give a big thank you to [everyone who contributed][contributors] or took part in discussions. Your help is always appreciated!

Palette can be found [on GitHub][palette_git], and [on crates.io][palette_crates].

Thank you for reading!

[palette_crates]: https://crates.io/crates/palette
[palette_git]: https://github.com/Ogeon/palette
[contributors]: https://github.com/Ogeon/palette/graphs/contributors?from=2023-08-10&to=2024-01-28
